part of the reason why battle royales
are so addictive and people play them so
much is because of the denial of reward
the fact that you don't always win
actually makes it like far more
addicting
all right i don't feel enjoyment from
video games anymore and what can i do
about it i never have much of a social
life so i usually spend most of my time
playing video games but it's been about
a decade of that being the thing that i
do in my free time and what i'm noticing
now is i have a mental block when it
comes to starting new games and playing
one in general i only manage to play
games i get addicted to not enjoy for
example cs go
it's a time sink that i'm only ever able
to play and at this point i can only
play games for the sake of playing them
so i was just wondering if there was a
way for me to not only be able to start
games i want to play but enjoy the them
too so this is a situation where
someone's been playing games for 10
years
they also have noticed that the only
games that they can play are the ones
that they don't enjoy
and they can't even start to play new
games because they like don't enjoy it
anymore and they actually like want to
learn how to enjoy games again so we're
going to start by sharing two or maybe
three principles of neuroscience and
then we're going to go to some practical
advice
so the first principle of neuroscience
to understand or maybe psychology is
that people have done numerous studies
on why video games are addictive okay
and so when i say addictive what that
means is remember an addiction is
something that reinforces a behavior and
this will get to principle neuroscience
too in a second
but why games are addictive is actually
the denial of reward
so what makes a game addictive is not
winning but the fact that you don't
always win
so part of the reason that battle
royales became so addictive and in some
parameters fortnite for example is the
most
successful game ever in like some
dimensions so if you look at like
the rate at which fortnight dominated
the market and how much money they made
how quickly
fortnite like is number one in some
parameters
and so why is that like what's the whole
thing like like wouldn't you think like
don't people like playing video games
but then you have a game like fortnite
where i think you have like 100 players
that are competing for one victory spot
and so i think part of what they sort of
what i don't know that they sort of did
this intentionally but part of the
reason why battle royales are so
addictive and people play them so much
is because of the denial of reward so
the fact that you don't always win
actually makes it like far more
addicting so that has nothing to do with
fun and we'll get to that in a second
okay
so the first thing to understand is that
the addiction aspect playing a video
game despite not enjoying it and like
not being able to quit despite not
having fun
has to do with an addiction and that has
to do with like dopamine and our
reinforcement kind of circuitry so
there's the mesolimbic circuit in the
brain which sort of governs this and the
main neurotransmitter is dopamine
and so that's like behavioral
reinforcement and the denial of reward
strongly stimulates that system it's
also why gambling is so addictive
because you don't always win right so
the random reinforcement schedule is
more addicting than the consistent
reinforcement schedule
the second thing to understand if if
it's addictive why don't i have fun
so the circuits in your brain that
involve dopamine reward circuits and
behavioral reinforcement are actually
separate from the hedonic circuits of
the brain so the reward circuits and the
hedonic separates are technically
separate and this is kind of how we
understand this okay so the the hedonic
circuits of the of the brain actually
involve like different receptors and
even use things like endocannabinoids
and like different compounds so a lot of
like pleasure seeking and like pleasure
and enjoyment isn't necessarily the
dopamine circuit they're actually
discrete circuits dopamine's also
involved in pleasure because the brain
isn't you know it's not simple like that
like there's just circuit one and
circuit two but we do know that the
experience of pleasure and the
experience of like motivation and reward
and behavioral
uh reinforcement actually somewhat
separate and we know this actually by
studying the brains of people with
schizophrenia so we know in in the
brains of people with schizophrenia is
that like reinforcing behavior is very
difficult for them but their pleasure
actually doesn't decrease
so for example like if someone has bad
schizophrenia it's going to be really
hard for them to like cook themselves a
meal
but whether they cook it or not they
still enjoy or derive just as much
pleasure from it and so people got
pretty confused and they were trying to
figure out like if people with
schizophrenia are still like getting
pleasure out of it why don't they do it
and this is when they stumbled upon this
discovery that hedonics
and
like motivational drive are actually
separate circuits
so i suspect what's going on is that
you've got some kind of like problem
here in terms of you've got some circuit
in your brain that has developed a habit
and has almost like an addictive kind of
nature to it and this also goes back to
um we we had a lecture recently about uh
adhd and substance use and remember that
like when you start using a substance
they're like different phases of
addiction so in the first phase it's
like stimulates a particular part of
brain and you have fun with it and then
as an addiction sets into your brain it
actually travels from more of your like
prefrontal cortex and mesolimbic system
into your striatum and it moves to a
different part of your brain and then it
becomes a habit and once it becomes a
habit the reward like the pleasure from
it starts to decrease
so we kind of see this a lot in
long-term gamers where they're addicted
to the game but they don't even have fun
playing it like even think about like
mobas or like csgo is a really good
example of this where like it's really
easy to tilt like if you actually you
know take someone who plays eight hours
of games a day
the amount of positive feeling that they
generate from playing the game is
actually outweighed by the negative
feeling right and so there's another
kind of principle here where remember
that the video game doesn't just give
you pleasure it also takes away pain
from other parts of your life so playing
video game this is something that's
pretty consistent is it kind of numbs
out your mind and like protects you
against the negative stuff
so those are a couple of interesting
neuroscientific principles about you
know why you can get stuck playing a
game and not even enjoy it and not be
able to quit the next thing is kind of
naturally becomes okay so then what do
you do about it so the simplest way
to stop playing games or even start and
because this person's question wasn't
how do i stop playing games it's how do
i start enjoying them again
is to actually do a dopamine detox
so we have a youtube video about this
but i think that resetting all of those
neurotransmitters and neurochemicals and
like the ratio of like receptors to like
what's being secreted
i've seen good progress happen in about
two weeks for most people so like don't
play any video games and ideally steal
steer clear of technology for about two
weeks no reddit no youtube or anything
like that
you know grab a book like it helps if
you kind of do this over like a vacation
or something like that we've got a whole
video about it but if you engage in in a
dopamine detox and reset your dopamine
circuitry like if you kind of like
abstain from video games or other like
short hanging technology for a period of
two weeks you will find that you're able
to engage in more pleasurable activity
and even games will start being fun
again
so i've i noticed that back when i was
like addicted to video games they
weren't even fun and now when i play
video games they're lots of fun
like i love playing video games they're
so much fun and i wish i could do it
more but this is the kind of thing where
it's sort of like the more you do it the
less pleasurable it becomes right
so i'd say the fastest way is to
dopamine detox now remember that
dopamine detox is people don't
understand this they don't expect they
don't know what to expect the main thing
about dopamine detox is to remember that
like the main enemy and dopamine detox
is going to be boredom
so you will be bored for two weeks
and you're like what you have to survive
is like a period of boredom which sounds
terrifying it's why everyone takes their
cell phones to use the bathroom right
because like the idea of being bored
even for a brief amount of time and
having nothing to do
is like oddly terrifying toss
so if you guys want like an easy
practice to prep you for a dopamine
detox it's very simple but it's also
kind of hard but you can do it
is every time you go to the bathroom
don't take your cell phone don't take
anything to do when you use your
bathroom just go to the bathroom and
just do the bathroom
and if you really think about it it's
like oh my god i need the cell phone so
bad but no you don't like it's gonna be
you'll be in there like two minutes five
minutes like if you're unlucky like 10
minutes
right you'll survive it'll be okay
right and and so like you'll be fine
like just go like every time when you do
a number two like don't take your cell
phone
just go without it easy
that's a good way to prep for a dopamine
detox there's a whole video about how
dopamine detox well
uh so we kind of go into a lot of
details about it so check that video out
on our youtube channel okay